[doc] Describe types of maps from Petra Object Model (#311)
4C-multiphysics/4C: doc/readthedocs/petra_object_model.rst

.. _petra-object-model:

Distributed computation with the Petra Object Model
===================================================

> |FOURC| is hevily based on the Trlinos project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|FOURC| is heavily based on the Trilinos project.
```

Reviewer 2: I noticed that there are quite a few of these typos. Why does our typos hook not catch them? :thinking:

Reviewer 2: I had a look and the typos hook works. Apparently `heavily` is not a common misspelling, so they haven't included that inside typos.

Author: Fixed it.

.. _petra-object-model:

Distributed computations with the Petra Object Model
====================================================

|FOURC| is heavily based on the Trilinos project.
For this reason, management of data distributed across a parallel machine
follows Trilinos' **Petra Object Model**.

Petra Object Model
------------------

The Petra Object Model is a foundational framework within the Trilinos project,
designed to facilitate the construction and manipulation of distributed memory objects in parallel computing environments.
It provides a structured approach to managing data distribution and communication across multiple processors,
ensuring efficient parallel computations.

It uses the concept of a **map** for the

> - **Distribution of global objects**: A map defines how a global object, such as a vector or matrix, is partitioned across the local memories of different processors (MPI ranks).

Reviewer 2: I know that we (myself included) frequently use these terms interchangeably:

- "(MPI) rank": an integer [0,N) where N is the associated MPI communicator size
- "(MPI) process": the actual OS process id
- "processor": Not sure, but sounds like the whole CPU (core) to me? So more hardware than software.

WDYT about prefacing this section with a short note on MPI and what the terms mean? Also, I recently isolated all or most of the explicit MPI calls. I think it would be helpful for developers to explain how Petra handles MPI communication for them and explain when they need explicit MPI communication themselves. I am volunteering to do it as a follow-up if there is interest in having that. But let's watch out not to replicate trivially searchable things ;) 

Would you mind replacing "processor" with one of the other two, depending on the context?

Author: I usually prefer "process / processes" over "processor / processors" to avoid confusion with hardware. Somehow, this made it into the draft anyways. 

I will go for "MPI process".

  Assume further that the first two rows are stored on *p0*, reading

  .. math::
    \begin{bmatrix} y_1\\y_2 \end{bmatrix}, \quad
    \begin{bmatrix} 2 & -1 & 0\\-1 & 2 & -1 \end{bmatrix}, \quad
    \begin{bmatrix} x_1\\x_2 \end{bmatrix},

  while the last row is stored on *p1*, reading

  .. math::
    \begin{bmatrix} y_3 \end{bmatrix}, \quad
    \begin{bmatrix} 0 & -1 & 2 \end{bmatrix}, \quad
    \begin{bmatrix} x_3 \end{bmatrix}.

  Then, the Maps of the Petra Object Model read as follows:

  +-------------+---------+------+
  + Type of Map | *p0*    | *p1* |
  +=============+=========+======+
  | Row map     | 0, 1    | 2    |
  +-------------+---------+------+
  | Column map  | 0, 1, 2 | 1, 2 |
  +-------------+---------+------+
  | Domain map  | 0, 1    | 2    |
  +-------------+---------+------+
  | Range map   | 0, 1    | 2    |
  +-------------+---------+------+

  Note:

  - Rows are fully owned by a single processor.
  - Row map = Domain map = Range map (all maps are 1-to-1)
  - Column map is not 1-to-1

Types of Maps -- a finite element point of view
-----------------------------------------------

While domain map and range map are strongly tied to matrices,

> the concept of row and column maps transfers directly to finite element discretizations using an overlapping domain decomposition to distribute the mesh across a parllel computer.

Reviewer 2: Is the fact that the domain decomposition is overlapping relevant here? I am not 100% sure but with "overlapping domain decomposition" you seem to be referring to the fact that we like to evaluate elements on multiple ranks and do on-processor assembly into the dofs owned by the relevant ranks (so the "overlapping" part are the elements that are evaluated multiple times, right?). If we do off-processor assembly (only evaluating every element once), we still need the concept of row and column maps, don't we? An element at the interface between subdomains might need "column dofs" from other ranks for evaluation and the associated matrix rows will need the see columns as well for multiplication. For me, "overlapping domain decomposition" is associated more with linear solvers than with the MPI layout (see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Domain_decomposition_methods), although they are related in the sense that you probably need a decomposed MPI layout for the linear solve technique to make any sense.

Long story short, I think we should either explain what we mean by overlapping domain decomposition or leave it out since everything you write seems to be true without this condition.

Author: @sebproell, that is a good point! Indeed, I was referring to the case of evaluating (column) elements twice and only assembling into "row dofs". Your example with off-processor assembly is correct to. It naturally arises from overlapping DD, but does not fully fit into the current description.

Yes, DD methods can be used as solvers, yet their sole usage for distributing data across processes is valid on its own in my point of view. Nevertheless, I agree that the fact of "overlapping domain decomposition" does not really matter here. I will remove its mentioning.

> the concept of row and column maps transfers directly to finite element discretizations using an overlapping domain decomposition to distribute the mesh across a parllel computer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the concept of row and column maps transfers directly to finite element discretizations using an overlapping domain decomposition to distribute the mesh across a parallel computer.
```
